DNA vaccines: prime time is now
Ebony N Gary and David B Weiner
Recently newer synthetic DNA vaccines have been rapidly
advanced to clinical study and have demonstrated an
impressive degree of immune potency and tolerability.
Improvements in DNA delivery over prior needle and syringe
approaches include jet delivery, gene gun delivery, among
others. Among the most effective of these new delivery
methods, advanced electroporation (EP), combined with other
advances, induces robust humoral and cellular immunity in
both preventative as well as therapeutic studies.
Advancements in the design of the DNA inserts include leader
sequence changes, RNA and codon optimizations, improved
insert designs, increased concentrations of DNA, and skin
delivery, appear to complement newer delivery strategies.
These advances also provide a framework for the in vivo
production of synthetic DNA biologics. In this review, we focus
on recent studies of synthetic DNA vaccines in the clinic for the
prevention or treatment of infectious diseases with a focus on
adaptive electroporation for delivery, and briefly summarize
novel preclinical data advancing the in vivo delivery of DNAencoded antibody-like biologics.
Address
The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA, United States
Corresponding author:
Weiner, David B (dweiner@wistar.org, egary@wistar.org)
Current Opinion in Immunology 2020, 65:21–27
This review comes from a themed issue on Vaccines
Edited by Bali Pulendran and Rino Rappuoli
For a complete overview see the Issue and the Editorial
Available online 4th April 2020
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coi.2020.01.006
0952-7915/ã 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an
open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Introduction
Vaccines are among the most important medical interventions in human history. We are in an era of unprecedented scientific advance in vaccine technologies.
However, the development of new vaccines faces challenges. This is due to multiple factors including the high
cost of their development which drives a focus on larger
markets, slower than optimal time lines for vaccine
advancement to clinical testing, among other complexities. One example is the increased occurrence of emerging and reemerging infections which appear sporadically
and could benefit greatly from rapid vaccine interventions. Examples include Lassa, Powasan virus, ZIKA
virus (ZIKV), Ebola virus (EBOV), and the coronaviruses- Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS-CoV), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 1 and 2 (SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2)- among
many others. An ideal vaccine platform should be simple
to deploy, rapid to develop, reproducible, temperature
stable, and consistently manufacturable- thus lowering
costs and development risks while providing an important new tool. The synthetic DNA (SynDNA) platform
addresses many of these important goals.
DNA immunogens can be directly designed and optimized from pathogen sequences and synthesized allowing flexibility and speed in preclinical testing with rapid
transition to clinical scale up. In vivo expression of the
constructed sequences facilitates rapid screening and
down selection of potential vaccine candidates. Multiple
studies have reported that synDNA allows for the generation of cellular and humoral responses against pathogens
with impact in challenge model systems. Originally intramuscular (IM) inoculation and more recently intradermal
(ID) delivery using highly concentrated formulations
have induced consistent immunity in the clinic. Delivery
methods such as jet delivery, gene gun delivery, nanoparticle delivery, and others have demonstrated increased
DNA uptake in vivo [1].
Adaptive electroporation (EP) [2] which controls the
energy delivered during in vivo EP improves increases
transformation efficiency over needle and syringe delivery. Following local injection by needle and syringe
plasmid DNA is taken up by a limited number of cells
at the site of injection, where the DNA is transcribed into
mRNA and translated into antigen intracellularly. Adaptive EP increases the initial uptake of plasmid by local
cells approximately 500x [3]. This creates a large antigen
bolus to drive a more potent immune response. With
adaptive EP most cells in the local field can be transfected
[4]. Locally transfected antigen-presenting cells (APCs)
can directly traffic to the regional lymph node (LN) which
is critical to initiating the immune response [5,6]. Translated antigen can be shed exogenously and picked up by
APCs for cross presentation. Shed exogenous soluble
antigen can drain locally to the regional LN and extracellular spaces in the local environment allowing for
engagement of B cell immunity. Local tissue becomes
a protein factory for presentation of antigen on major
histocompatibility complex-1 (MHC I) or MHC II molecules for re-expansion of LN primed CD8+ T cells
(cytotoxic T lymphocytes, or CTLs) and CD4+ T cells,
respectively (Figure 1a). For comprehensive review, see
Ref. [4]. Since the 900
s DNA plasmids have been
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Immunology 2020, 65:21–27
delivered to tens of thousands of patients by multiple
routes, in trials studying numerous vaccine antigen targets with a highly consistent safety record supporting its
further clinical development [7].
Clinical review of recent DNA vaccines
Here we discuss recent clinical studies using the
SynDNA platform (Figure 2) with a specific focus on
DNA vaccines targeting emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases and cancers of infectious etiology.
More than 2 million new human immunodeficiency virus-1
(HIV-1) infections occur annually, highlighting the need
for an effective prophylactic vaccine. In two multicenter,
randomized clinical trials the immunogenicity of synDNA
constructs encoding HIV-1 clade B gag, pol, and env
proteins (PENNVAX-B DNA vaccine (PV)) alone, or in
combination with plasmid-encoded IL-12 was evaluated
with (HVTN 080) and without (HVTN 070) intramuscular
EP. The vaccination was safe and well-tolerated. Addition
of molecular plasmid encoded IL-12 (pIL-12) and EP
delivery resulted in a dose sparing effect with immunogenicity superior to vaccines with electroporation, with fewer
doses,demonstrating a dose-sparing effect ofthe combined
platform. In the vaccine + IL-12 group with EP delivery,
more than 80% of vaccinees had detectable HIV-specific T
cell responses after three immunizations [8].
Venezuelanequine encephalitis virus(VEEV)is amosquitoborne alphavirus and is a recognized biosafety threat for
humans for which there are no approved vaccines or therapeutics. Hannaman et al. studied a DNA vaccine targeting
theE3-E2-6K-E1 genes of theVEEVsubtype IABenvelope
and compared intradermal versus intramuscular electroporation (EP) at various doses in a small number of human
subjects. In this study high doseintramuscularEP resultedin
the development of VEEV neutralizing antibodies in all
subjects while intradermal-EP promoted neutralizing antibody at lower levels and in fewer subjects [9]. T cell
responses were not reported in this study.
22 Vaccines
Figure 1
(a) (b) DNA Immunization
Infectious Disease Targets Malignant Targets
DNA-based immunotherapies Plasmid
DNA
Plasmid
DNA
Transfected cells at the site of injection
present antigens on MHC I and MHCII
molecules, priming CD4+ abd CD8+ T
cells. Soluble antigen primes B cell
immunity
•Synthesized in vivo
•Codelivery of multiple dBiTEs
•Easily produced
•Long half-life
•Antigen synthesized in vivo
•Synthetic consensus immunogen
 breaks self-tolerance
•Easily produced
•Therapeutic and prophylactic
 treatment
•Multiple antigens in a single
 plasmid formulation
SynDNA bispecifics and
DMAbs
DNA
immunization Direct transfection of
antigen-presenting cells in
tissue
antigen-specific B
cell
antigen-specific
CD4+ T cell
antigen-specific
CD8+ T cell
cancer-specific
CD8+ T cells CD8+ T cell
cancer-specific antigens i.e
HPVE6, E7
Traffic to local LNs
and amplification of
responses
Antigen-debot
provides
re-expansion of
LN-primed cells
Current Opinion in Immunology
DNA vaccination and immunotherapy. (a) DNA-encoded antigens are transcribed, translated, and presented on MHC I and II molecules in vivo,
promoting robust anti-target immunity. (b) The 1000X increase in DNA delivery coupled with highly efficient encoded antigen production allow this
local delivery to become a source for production of biologics. Inserts are highly designed to allow for local expression. Multiple publications have
now described how DNA-encoded monoclonal antibodies (DMAbs), bispecific antibodies, and immunogens can be used to target cancer or
infectious diseases.
Current Opinion in Immunology 2020, 65:21–27 www.sciencedirect.com
Zika virus (ZIKV) is a mosquito-borne infectious disease
characterized by fever, rash, conjunctivitis, and malaise.
Despite the relatively mild clinical illness, ZIKV infection
during pregnancy is associated with severe congenital birth
defects such as microcephaly. The first Zika vaccine
advanced to the clinic was a synDNA vaccine delivered
by adaptive EP [10–12]. Tebas et al. evaluated the safety
and immunogenicity of a synthetic DNA vaccine targeting
Zika prME, [12]. In this Phase 1 dose-ranging study
participants received either 1 or 2 mg of ZIKV DNA
immunogens delivered by the ID route and CELLECTRA-EP at 0, 4, and 12 weeks. After the third immunization Zika-specific binding antibodies were detected in all
participants at average titers of 1/2000 for the 1 mg dose
group or 1/3000 for the higher dose group) 96% of participants developed Zika-neutralizing antibodies detected via
U87 neuronal cell assay.Importantly, passive transferstudies where patient serum was given to interferon knockout
mice (whichare susceptible toZIKVinfection) showed that
sera from vaccinated subjects protected mice from lethal
pathogenic ZIKV challenge [12]. ZIKV-specific T cells
were induced in most subjects. This ZIKV DNA vaccine
was moved from research program initiation to the clinic in
just 6.5 months highlighting the efficiency and speed with
which a synthetic DNA platform can be brought to bear
against an emerging orre-emergingpathogen.TheVaccine
Research Center (VRC) of the national institutes of health
reported the results of two ZIKV DNA vaccine trials(VRC
319 and VRC320) evaluating the safety and immunogenicity of DNA plasmids encoding the PrM and E proteins of a
ZIKV-Japanese encephalitis virus(JEV) chimera delivered
at 4 mg doses either 2x or 3x (VRC 319) or native leaderlike
ZIKV (VRC320) vaccines vaccinated with 4 mg doses
immunized three times at different intervals. In VRC
319 GMT average per group was (40–197) and for VRC
320 GMT ranged from (28–430). The vaccines induced
neutralizing titers using a reporter assay and showed T cell
mediated cytokine release [13] and the authorssuggestthat
the VRC320 vaccine group developed more consistent
seroconversion, neutralization, and T cell immunity over
the JEV chimeric Zika vaccine.
Ebola virus (EBOV) is the causative agent of severe viral
hemorrhagic disease in humans and non-human primates.
Synthetic DNA vaccines: prime time is approaching Gary and Weiner 23
Figure 2
2013 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
DNA vaccine encoding HIV-1
clade B gag, pol, env
(PENNVAX-B) with/without
Molecular IL-12 is safe and
immunogenic. EP and pIL-12
is dose-sparing. First
demonstration that DNA +EP
induces responses as potent
as viral-vectored vaccines.
HVTN 070/080 (ref. 5)
DNA vaccine encoding HIV-1 clade
B gag, pol, env (PENNVAX-GP) with
molecular IL-12 induced almost
100% vaccine response rate with
durable responses. ID-EP is as
potent as IM-EP with 1/5th dose.
HVTN 098 (ClinicalTrials.gov
Identifier: NCT02431767)
Influenza HA DNA prime via
Biojector jet delivery
followed by trivalent
inactivated influenza boost
(IIV3) helathy adults. VRC
703 (ref. 17) Wild-type and
JEV-chimeric ZIKV
jet-delivered DNA
vaccines are safe and
well tolerated in adult
volunteers VRC319,
320 (ref. 13)
VEEV DNA vaccine
is safe,
immunogenic and
well-tolerated in
human patients
(ref. 9)
Intradermal EP of SynCone
EBOV vaccine promotes
cellular and humoral
responses in humans. 18
monts beach-to-clinic (ref.
16)
Anti-ZIKV DMAb clinical
trial begins February
2019 (clinicaltrials.gov
identifier:
NCT03831503)
MERS-CoV DNA
vaccine phase I trial,
vaccine is safe and
immunogenic (ref. 19)
DNA vaccine +
pembrolizumab
promotes anti-tumor
responses in prostate
cancer patients patients
(ref. 21)
First-in-human ZIKV DNA
vaccine is safe and
immunogenic in
humans. 6.5 months
bench-to-clinic (ref. 12)
HPV E6/E7 DNA
vaccines is safe and
efficacious against
cervical neoplasia in
human patients (ref.
24)
Influenza HA DNA prime via Biojector
jet delivery followed by trivalent
inactivated influenza boost (IIV3) in
adults (ref. 21) and children aged 6-17
years. First US study of a DNA
vaccine in children. VRC 702 (ref. 20)
Current Opinion in Immunology
Selected Recent DNA vaccines in the clinic. All the reported constructs were found to be safe and immunogenic in the clinic. Several of these
have reported clinical impact or outcomes representing important immune readouts.
www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Immunology 2020, 65:21–27
To date, there have been twenty-nine EBOV outbreaks
with mortality rates reaching up to 90%. Patel et al.
reported that rapid in vivo protection of mice following
a single immunization with a synthetic DNA vaccine
encoding consensus EBOV glycoproteins (GP) representative of EBOV outbreak strains spanning the years from
1976 to 2008 against a heterologous mouse-adapted
EBOV strain [14]. SynEBOV-GP DNA immunization
also resulted in 100% protection of macaques from lethal
EBOV challenge [14]. Importantly in these studies
determined that a dose-sparing 2-injection regimen
delivered via the recently characterized intradermal-EP
(CELLECTRA-EP) [15] route was 100% protective
against lethal challenge. These responses were persistent
up to one year after immunization with robust recall
responses observed at this time point [14]. These promising results supported a first in-human (FIH) clinical
trial. Two EBOV-GP candidates, INO-4201 encoding a
SynconEBOV-GP antigen representative of outbreak
strains from 1976 to 2008, and INO 4202 encoding Zaire
Makona EBOV-GP from a 2014 outbreak, were evaluated
alone, together, and in combination with DNA-encoded
human interleukin-12 (IL-12) delivered by either the IM
or ID routes using Cellectra EP. Both delivery routes
induced potent anti-Ebola cellular and humoral immunity. However, the ID delivery route was dose sparing and
promoted more rapid seroconversion (100% seroreactivity) after 2 immunizations. The simplicity, consistency,
and tolerability of the ID format appears to exhibit
important advantages for vaccine development against
emerging and re-emerging pathogens [16], and could
have a supportive role for the current VSV-ZEBOV
vaccine.
The Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS-CoV), was first identified in 2012 is responsible
for an outbreak of cases which are clustered in the Arabian
Peninsula. In 2015 the first spread of MERS to a nonArabian Peninsula country (Seoul, Korea), generated a
major outbreak. Muthumani et al. reported on the development of a synthetic DNA vaccine encoding a MERS
spike protein which induced potent humoral and cellmediated immunity in mice, non-human primates, and
camels and protected vaccinated macaques from MERS
associated pneumonia following virus challenge [17,18]. A
phase-I, open-label, single-arm, dose-escalation clinical
trial was opened at the Walter-Reed Army Institute
for Research Clinical Trials. The vaccine was delivered
by intramuscular injection and CELLECTRA-EP.
Seroconversion was detected in 95% of patients.
MERS-CoV-specific T cell responses were detected in
76% of patients and persisted at 60 days post-final immunization [19].
Influenza viruses which undergo antigenic drift and shift
require new vaccine design annually to curb disease
spread. Recently the VRC of the NIH published two
clinical studies of a jet delivered DNA prime, matched,
trivalent inactivated virus boost influenza vaccine regimen in healthy adult volunteers, and in children. Compared to inactivated virus prime and boost, DNA prime
and virus boost induced trended toward greater humoral
responses including hemagglutinin inhibition (HAI) and
neutralization [20,21]. These findings collectively demonstrate the ability to rapidly apply the synthetic DNA
platform in the context of infectious disease or EID, with
potent immune performance, as well the excellent tolerability profile of the platform.
Immunotherapy for viral diseases
Human papilloma viruses (HPV) are oncogenic viruses
that infect mucosal surfaces. HPV is responsible for
almost 5% of all cancer worldwide [22]. Recombinant
HPV particle-based vaccines against specific oncogenic
HPVs and two strains of HPV that generate genital warts,
have impacted the incidence of HPV infection. However,
persons already infected with remain at high risk for a
collection of HPV diseases, including cervical cancer,
head and neck cancer, anal cancer, vaginal cancer, and
others HPV-associated cancers. The first-in-human (FIH)
clinical trial was advanced to test the hypothesis that a
synthetic DNA vaccine encoding HPV immunogens for
modified nuclear oncogenes E6 and E7 from HPV types
16 and 18 (two high risk genotypes) would induce CTLs
that might impact HPV-induced cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN). An initial immunogenicity study [23]
reported that the vaccine was highly immunogenic,
driving antibodies and CTLs in almost all vaccinated
subjects. A follow-up Phase IIb efficacy trail was subsequently reported [24]. The study showed potent induction of immunity including CD8 T cells that migrated to
the diseased cervical tissue. Overall 49.5% of women in
this study regressed their disease, while 40.2% regressed
and cleared their cervical infection. This is the first
therapeutic vaccine to show clinical efficacy against grade
2 and 3 CIN [24]. Additional study of this approach for
CIN is in progress. This report is also the first treatment
efficacy data generated for a DNA approach against a
human disease.
The SynDNA platform has the potential to synergize
with extant cancer therapy. In the clinic McNeel et al.
reported that combination anti-PD-1 immunotherapy
with a T-cell stimulating DNA vaccine was well-tolerated
and promoted antitumor responses [25]. A more recent
study by Agarwall et al. tested the adaptive EP delivery of
a synHPV vaccine for treatment of HPV positive head and
neck cancers [26]. This phase Ib/II safety, tolerability,
and immunogenicity study reported results of immunotherapy with MEDI0457 (DNA immunotherapy targeting HPV16/18 E6/E7 co-delivered with plasmid IL12)
delivered by adaptive CELLECTRA-EP. Twenty-two
patients with locally advanced, p16+
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) received MEDI0457.
24 Vaccines
Current Opinion in Immunology 2020, 65:21–27 www.sciencedirect.com
Overall the treatment was well tolerated. 90% of evaluable patients showed elevated antigen-specific T-cell
activity by IFNg ELISpot, and persistent cellular
responses surpassing 100 spot-forming units (SFUs)/106
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were noted
out to 1 year. Induction of HPV-specific CD8+ T cells was
observed in tumors post biopsy. One patient developed
metastatic disease and flow-cytometric analyses revealed
induction of HPV16-specific PD-1+ CD8+ T cells that
were not found before MEDI0547. Treatment of this
patient with anti-PD-1 therapy resulted in a rapid and
durable complete response. These data demonstrate that
MEDI0457 can induce clear and durable HPV16/18
antigen-specific peripheral and tumor-infiltrating
immune responses that may further benefit patients in
the context of check point inhibitor (CPI) therapy to
improve therapeutic outcomes. Interestingly, this group
reported a second complete responder in the context
of CPI combination therapy. Additional study of this
approach is ongoing (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:
NCT04001413). The combination of CPI with a potent
T cell generating synDNA vaccine represents an important tool for additional study in the broader context of
cancer immunotherapy.
SynDNA biologics in the preclinical setting
The use of biologics and modified biologicsto treat various
diseases has rapidly expanded. Similarly, other immune
disorders and cancers may be treated with monoclonal
antibodies targeting cancer-specific antigens or immunosuppressive molecules present on immune cells such as
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4)
and programmed cell death-1 (PD-1). Indeed anti-PD-1
andCTLA-4 immunotherapyhavehadsuccessinthe clinic
and become standard of care cancer treatment approaches
[27]. Recent reports have described use of the SynDNAencoded monoclonal antibody (DMAb) therapy to deliver
anti-PD-1 [28] and anti-CTLA-4 [29] immunotherapy
in vivo. Bi-specific antibodies which engage cancer targets
and cytotoxic T lymphocytes leading to T cell-mediated
killing of cancer cells, are growing in clinical importance.
The first FDA approved bispecific is Blincyto (Blinatumomab), which targets CD19 on B cellsfor treatment of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Bispecfic drugs are complex to
produce, can have short half-lives and as such, can be
associated with high costs per treatment limiting their
development and patient access. Taking into account its
high local production in tissues, new SynDNA Ig production approach offer an alternative production pipeline for
biologics. As an extension of this approach Perales-Puchalt
reported on in vivo delivery with several months expression
of a DNAencoded bispecific antibody delivered directly in
vivo which demonstrated potent tumor control in a mouse
model[30]supporting the delivery of nonnative Ig forms.
Early reports described the use of plasmid vector systems
forthe generationof antibody like molecules aswell as antiHIV-1 envelope neutralizing F(ab)s[31]. Xu et al. reported
Synthetic DNA vaccines: prime time is approaching Gary and Weiner 25
Table 1
Selected preclinical studies for DNA-encoded biologics
Target Disease etiology Biologic class Major findings Ref.
Zika virus Infectious DMAb Dual or single plasmid DNA delivery system results in expression of ZIKV
neutralizing antibodies and serum from DMAb immunized mice, protects naı¨ve
mice from ZIKV lethal challenge.
[38]
Ebola virus Infectious DMAb EBOV DMAbs confer 100% protection from lethal challenge in mice/. [35,39]
P. Aeruginosa Infectious DMAb Anti-Pseudomonas DMAB protects mice from lethal pneumonia challenge and
synergizes with antibiotic therapy resulting in protection from Antibiotic-resistant
pneumonia.
[40]
B. burgdorferi Infectious DMAb Anti-Borrelia DMAb protects mice from tick challenge and represents a novel
method for blocking Lyme disease transmission.
[41]
HIV-1 Infectious F(ab) Anti-HIV envelope neutralizing VRC01 F(ab) is produced rapidly in vivo following
DNA immunization and EP.
[31]
HIV-1 Infectious Broadly
neutralizing Abs
Multiple bNAbs expressed in mice and NHPs at high concentration
simultaneously, for extended periods
[33]
Dengue Infectious DMAb Delivery of multiple neutralizing DMAbs protects against all DENV serotypes and
prevents antibody-dependent enhancement.
[36]
Chikungunya virus Infectious DMAb A single injection of DMAb prophylaxis protects mice from CHIKV challenge.
Combination of DNA and DMAb immunization affords both rapid and long-term
protection.
[37]
Influenza Infectious DMAb DMAbs targeting influenza A and B protect mice from lethal challenge. [34,35]
HIV-1 Infectious Ig-like molecule Proof-of-concept study for DNA-based delivery of anti-HIV immunoadhesins
and in vivo modulation of protein function.
[32]
PD-1 Malignancy DMAb Anti-PD-1 DMAbs are produced rapidly and persist in mouse sera, extending
therapeutic window of immune checkpoint blockade therapy.
[28]
CTLA-4 Malignancy DMAb Anti-CTLA-4 DMAbs are rapidly produced in vivo and shrink tumors in mouse
cancer models.
[29]
HER2 Malignancy DMAb/DBiTE Anti-HER2 DMAb and a bispecific targeting HER2 and CD3 induce control of
ovarian tumors in mice and prolong survival.
[30]
www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Immunology 2020, 65:21–27
the use of the synDNA platform to express and sulfate the
antibody-like HIV-1 entry inhibitor eCD4-Ig [32] illustrating the potential for complex in vivo biologic assembly.
Recently, Wise et al. reported that DMAbs encoding HIVspecific broadly neutralizing antibodies could produce
functional broadly neutralizing antibodies in mice and
non-human primates [33]. This platform continues to
advance and DMAbs targeting influenza A and B
[34,35], dengue [36], Chikungunya [37], Zika [38],
and Ebola [35,39] with of protection in animal models.
DMAbs may also provide advantages as anti-bacterial therapeuticsto complement antibiotics. Patel et al. reported that
an optimized DMAb targeting the bacterium Pseudomonas
aeruginosa protected against lethal pneumonia in a mouse
model of antibiotic-resistant P. aeruginosa [40]. Similarly,
Wang et al. reported that a designed DMAb targeting the
Borrelia protein OspA could protect against challenge with
Borrelia-infected ticks, blocking Lyme disease transmission
in the gut of the feeding ticks in a mouse challenge model
[41]. These recent studies illustrate the growing interest in
the DMAb approach.Additionalstudy in this area islikely of
high importance as a flexible and approach for prevention or
treatment of infectious disease as well as for cancer therapy
(Table 1) bringing many of the advantages of the simple
DNA delivery platform.
Conclusions
The synthetic DNA platform has dramatically changed in
its performance over the last 8 years. A combination of
advances which have improved the delivery of the DNA
into cells, increased tolerability, combined with multiple
changes in genetic designs, and in formulations have
resulted in a more potent vaccine platform with many of
the features important for rapid vaccine development and
deployment against emerging Infectious diseases. Later
stage trials of these vaccines are worthy of significant
attention. The extension of such studies to conserved
non-viral cancer targets is similarly unique and important.
Recent animal research studies showing disease impact
from the biological delivery of monoclonal and bi-specific
antibodies as DMAbs has primed an expansion of DNAencoded biologics being investigated for infectious disease
and cancertherapiesin preclinicalsettings and hasresulted
in the first advance of DMAbsinto this clinic (clinicaltrials.
gov identifier: NCT03831503). The original pioneering
DNA vaccine papers suggested the conceptual development and deployment advantages of a simple nucleic acidbased vaccine platform for impacting a host of global
diseases[4]. Recent advancesin synthetic DNA technology have brought ussteps closer to thisimportant outcome
and may have important implications for the development
of vaccines against the newly emerged SARS-CoV-2.
Conflict of interest statement
D.B.W. has grant funding, participates in industry collaborations, and has received speaking honoraria and fees
for consulting. This service includes serving on scientific
review committees and advisory boards. Remuneration
includes direct payments or stocks/stock options and in
the interest of disclosure, therefore, he notes potential
conflicts associated with this work with, in particular,
Inovio, where he serves on the BOD/SAB, as well as
with Pfizer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck, Aldevron,
Roche, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, and possibly others.
References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review,
have been highlighted as
 of outstanding interest
1.

Jorritsma S, Gowans E, Grubor-Bauk B, Wijesundara D: Delivery
methods to increase cellular uptake and immunogenicity of
DNA vaccines. Vaccine 2016, 34:5488-5494.
2. Khan AS, Broderick KE, Sardesai NY: Clinical development of
intramuscular electroporation: providing a “boost” for DNA
vaccines. Electroporation Protocols. Springer; 2014:279-289.
3. Lambricht L, Lopes A, Kos S, Sersa G, Pre´ at V, Vandermeulen G:
Clinical potential of electroporation for gene therapy and DNA
vaccine delivery. Expert Opin Drug Deliv 2016, 13:295-310.
4.

Kutzler MA, Weiner DB: DNA vaccines: ready for prime time?
Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:776.
5. Chattergoon MA, Robinson TM, Boyer JD, Weiner DB: Specific
immune induction following DNA-based immunization
through in vivo transfection and activation of macrophages/
antigen-presenting cells. J Immunol 1998, 160:5707-5718.
6. Akbari O, Panjwani N, Garcia S, Tascon R, Lowrie D, Stockinger B:
DNA vaccination: transfection and activation of dendritic cells
as key events for immunity. J Exp Med 1999, 189:169-178.
7. Sheets RL, Stein J, Manetz TS, Andrews C, Bailer R,
Rathmann J, Gomez PL: Toxicological safety evaluation of
DNA plasmid vaccines against HIV-1, Ebola, severe acute
respiratory syndrome, or West Nile virus is similar despite
differing plasmid backbones or gene-inserts. Toxicol Sci
2006, 91:620-630.
8.

Kalams SA, Parker SD, Elizaga M, Metch B, Edupuganti S, Hural J,
De Rosa S, Carter DK, Rybczyk K, Frank I: Safety and
comparative immunogenicity of an HIV-1 DNA vaccine in
combination with plasmid interleukin 12 and impact of
intramuscular electroporation for delivery. J Infect Dis 2013,
208:818-829.
9. Hannaman D, Dupuy LC, Ellefsen B, Schmaljohn CS: A phase
1 clinical trial of a DNA vaccine for Venezuelan equine
encephalitis delivered by intramuscular or intradermal
electroporation. Vaccine 2016, 34:3607-3612.
10. Muthumani K, Griffin BD, Agarwal S, Kudchodkar SB,
Reuschel EL, Choi H, Kraynyak KA, Duperret EK, Keaton AA,
Chung C: In vivo protection against ZIKV infection and
pathogenesis through passive antibody transfer and active
immunisation with a prMEnv DNA vaccine. npj Vaccines 2016,
1:16021.
11. Griffin BD, Muthumani K, Warner BM, Majer A, Hagan M, Audet J,
Stein DR, Ranadheera C, Racine T, De La Vega M-A: DNA
vaccination protects mice against Zika virus-induced damage
to the testes. Nat Commun 2017, 8:15743.
12.

Tebas P, Roberts CC, Muthumani K, Reuschel EL,
Kudchodkar SB, Zaidi FI, White S, Khan AS, Racine T, Choi H:
Safety and immunogenicity of an anti–Zika virus DNA
vaccine—preliminary report. New Engl J Med 2017 http://dx.doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMoa1708120.
13. Gaudinski MR, Houser KV, Morabito KM, Hu Z, Yamshchikov G,
Rothwell RS, Berkowitz N, Mendoza F, Saunders JG, Novik L:
Safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity of two Zika virus DNA
26 Vaccines
Current Opinion in Immunology 2020, 65:21–27 www.sciencedirect.com
vaccine candidates in healthy adults: randomised, open-label,
phase 1 clinical trials. Lancet 2018, 391:552-562.
14. Patel A, Reuschel EL, Kraynyak KA, Racine T, Park DH, Scott VL,
Audet J, Amante D, Wise MC, Keaton AA: Protective efficacy and
long-term immunogenicity in cynomolgus macaques by Ebola
virus glycoprotein synthetic DNA vaccines. J Infect Dis 2018,
219:544-555.
15. Broderick K, Shen X, Soderholm J, Lin F, McCoy J, Khan A, Yan J,
Morrow M, Patel A, Kobinger G: Prototype development and
preclinical immunogenicity analysis of a novel minimally
invasive electroporation device. Gene Ther 2011, 18:258.
16.

Tebas P, Kraynyak KA, Patel A, Maslow JN, Morrow MP,
Sylvester AJ, Knoblock D, Gillespie E, Amante D, Racine T:
Intradermal SynConJ Ebola GP DNA vaccine is temperature
stable and safely demonstrates cellular and humoral
immunogenicity advantages in healthy volunteers. J Infect Dis
2019, 220.3:400-410.
17. Muthumani K, Falzarano D, Reuschel EL, Tingey C, Flingai S,
Villarreal DO, Wise M, Patel A, Izmirly A, Aljuaid A: A synthetic
consensus anti–spike protein DNA vaccine induces protective
immunity against Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus in nonhuman primates. Sci Transl Med 2015, 7
301ra132–301ra132.
18. Muthumani K, Falzarano D, Reuschel E, Kraynyak K, Ugen K,
Kim P, Maslow J, Kim J, Sardesai N, Kobinger G: A synthetic
consensus anti-spike protein DNA vaccine induces protective
immunity against Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus in non-human primates. Int J Infect Dis 2016, 45:23.
19.

Modjarrad K, Roberts CC, Mills KT, Castellano AR, Paolino K,
Muthumani K, Reuschel EL, Robb ML, Racine T, M-d Oh: Safety
and immunogenicity of an anti-Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus DNA vaccine: a phase 1, open-label,
single-arm, dose-escalation trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2019,
19:1013-1022.
20.

Houser KV, Yamshchikov GV, Bellamy AR, May J, Enama ME,
Sarwar U, Larkin B, Bailer RT, Koup R, Paskel M: DNA vaccine
priming for seasonal influenza vaccine in children and
adolescents 6 to 17 years of age: a phase 1 randomized clinical
trial. PLoS One 2018, 13:e0206837.
21. Carter C, Houser KV, Yamshchikov GV, Bellamy AR, May J,
Enama ME, Sarwar U, Larkin B, Bailer RT, Koup R: Safety and
immunogenicity of investigational seasonal influenza
hemagglutinin DNA vaccine followed by trivalent inactivated
vaccine administered intradermally or intramuscularly in
healthy adults: an open-label randomized phase 1 clinical trial.
PLoS One 2019, 14.
22. Serrano B, Brotons M, Bosch FX, Bruni L: Epidemiology and
burden of HPV-related disease. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet
Gynaecol 2018, 47:14-26.
23. Bagarazzi ML, Yan J, Morrow MP, Shen X, Parker RL, Lee JC,
Giffear M, Pankhong P, Khan AS, Broderick KE: Immunotherapy
against HPV16/18 generates potent TH1 and cytotoxic cellular
immune responses. Sci Transl Med 2012, 4 155ra138–155ra138.
24.

Trimble CL, Morrow MP, Kraynyak KA, Shen X, Dallas M, Yan J,
Edwards L, Parker RL, Denny L, Giffear M: Safety, efficacy, and
immunogenicity of VGX-3100, a therapeutic synthetic DNA
vaccine targeting human papillomavirus 16 and 18 E6 and E7
proteins for cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 2/3: a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 2b trial.
Lancet 2015, 386:2078-2088.
25. McNeel DG, Eickhoff JC, Jeraj R, Staab MJ, Straus J, Rekoske B,
Liu G: DNA Vaccine with Pembrolizumab to Elicit Antitumor
Responses inPatientswithMetastatic,Castration-ResistantProstate
Cancer (mCRPC). American Society of Clinical Oncology; 2017.
26. Aggarwal C, Cohen RB, Morrow MP, Kraynyak KA, Sylvester AJ,
Knoblock DM, Bauml JM, Weinstein GS, Lin A, Boyer J:
Immunotherapy targeting HPV16/18 generates potent immune
responses in HPV-associated head and neck cancer. Clin
Cancer Res 2019, 25:110-124.
27. Ribas A, Wolchok JD: Cancer immunotherapy using checkpoint
blockade. Science 2018, 359:1350-1355.
28.

Perales-Puchalt A, Duperret EK, Muthumani K, Weiner DB:
Simplifying checkpoint inhibitor delivery through in vivo
generation of synthetic DNA-encoded monoclonal antibodies
(DMAbs). Oncotarget 2019, 10:13.
29.

Duperret EK, Trautz A, Stoltz R, Patel A, Wise MC, PeralesPuchalt A, Smith T, Broderick KE, Masteller E, Kim JJ: Synthetic
DNA-encoded monoclonal antibody delivery of Anti–CTLA-4
antibodies induces tumor shrinkage in vivo. Cancer Res 2018,
78:6363-6370.
30.

Perales-Puchalt A, Duperret EK, Yang X, Hernandez P, Wojtak K,
Zhu X, Jung S-H, Tello-Ruiz E, Wise MC, Montaner LJ: DNAencoded bispecific T cell engagers and antibodies present
long-term antitumor activity. JCI Insight 2019, 4.
31. Muthumani K, Flingai S, Wise M, Tingey C, Ugen KE, Weiner DB:
Optimized and enhanced DNA plasmid vector based in vivo
construction of a neutralizing anti-HIV-1 envelope
glycoprotein Fab. Hum Vaccin Immunother 2013, 9:2253-2262.
32.

Xu Z, Wise MC, Choi H, Perales-Puchalt A, Patel A, Tello-Ruiz E,
Chu JD, Muthumani K, Weiner DB: Synthetic DNA delivery by
electroporation promotes robust in vivo sulfation of broadly
neutralizing anti-HIV immunoadhesin eCD4-Ig. EBioMedicine
2018, 35:97-105.
33.

Wise MC, Xu Z, Tello-Ruiz E, Beck C, Trautz A, Patel A, Elliott ST,
Chokkalingam N, Kim S, Kerkau MG: In vivo delivery of synthetic
DNA–encoded antibodies induces broad HIV-1–neutralizing
activity. J Clin Invest 2020, 130.
34. Elliott ST, Kallewaard NL, Benjamin E, Wachter-Rosati L,
McAuliffe JM, Patel A, Smith TR, Schultheis K, Park DH, Flingai S:
DMAb inoculation of synthetic cross reactive antibodies
protects against lethal influenza A and B infections. npj
Vaccines 2017, 2:18.
35. Andrews CD, Luo Y, Sun M, Yu J, Goff AJ, Glass PJ, Padte NN,
Huang Y, Ho DD: In vivo production of monoclonal antibodies
by gene transfer via electroporation protects against lethal
influenza and Ebola infections. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev 2017,
7:74-82.
36. Flingai S, Plummer EM, Patel A, Shresta S, Mendoza JM,
Broderick KE, Sardesai NY, Muthumani K, Weiner DB: Protection
against dengue disease by synthetic nucleic acid antibody
prophylaxis/immunotherapy. Sci Rep 2015, 5:12616.
37.

Muthumani K, Block P, Flingai S, Muruganantham N,
Chaaithanya IK, Tingey C, Wise M, Reuschel EL, Chung C,
Muthumani A: Rapid and long-term immunity elicited by DNAencoded antibody prophylaxis and DNA vaccination against
chikungunya virus. J Infect Dis 2016, 214:369-378.
38.

Esquivel RN, Patel A, Kudchodkar SB, Park DH, Stettler K,
Beltramello M, Allen JW, Mendoza J, Ramos S, Choi H: In vivo
delivery of a DNA-encoded monoclonal antibody protects nonhuman primates against Zika Virus. Mol Ther 2019, 27:974-985.
39. Patel A, Park DH, Davis CW, Smith TR, Leung A, Tierney K,
Bryan A, Davidson E, Yu X, Racine T: In vivo delivery of synthetic
human DNA-encoded monoclonal antibodies protect against
ebolavirus infection in a mouse model. Cell Rep 2018, 25:1982-
1993 e1984.
40.

Patel A, DiGiandomenico A, Keller AE, Smith TR, Park DH,
Ramos S, Schultheis K, Elliott ST, Mendoza J, Broderick KE: An
engineered bispecific DNA-encoded IgG antibody protects
against Pseudomonas aeruginosa in a pneumonia challenge
model. Nat Commun 2017, 8:637.
41. Wang Y, Esquivel R, Flingai S, Schiller ZA, Kern A, Agarwal S,
Chu J, Patel A, Sullivan K, Wise MC: Anti-OspA DNA-encoded
monoclonal antibody prevents transmission of spirochetes in
tick challenge providing sterilizing immunity in mice. J Infect
Dis 2018, 219:1146-1150.
Synthetic DNA vaccines: prime time is approaching Gary and Weiner 27
www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Immunology 2020, 65:21–27
